Well, testing one, two, three, four, one, two, three, four testing.
This is Monday the 18th, Monday the 18th.
This is Monday the 18th.
June 18, year 2000, have the pleasure and honor of chatting with Dr. Jarvis Miller about his student experiences here at Texas A&M.
To begin with, please introduce yourself to this tape and anyone that might listen to it or read a transcription, describe family background, where'd you grow up, mom and dad, what they do, where'd you go to high school and so forth.
I'm Jarvis Miller.
I'm from Orange Grove, a small town in South Texas, 35 miles west of Corpus Christi.
My high school graduating class had 16 in it.
We didn't have chemistry or physics or calculus, so I came to A&M with some disadvantage.
My parents or my family, early settlers in the area, the first came there in 1852, Corpus Christi.
These were the parents of my great grandparents on my grandmother's side, grandmother Miller's side.
My grandfather Miller came there in 1856 from North Carolina, settled on the New Asus River.
My, one of his sons, my great uncle, Dimry B. Miller, attended A&M in the 1890s.
And while he didn't graduate, he considered himself an Aggie.
My dad was one of four brothers.
His other three brothers attended the University of Texas, and he was the only Aggie in the group, so he took a lot of kidding over the years.
My mother had been a high school English and Spanish teacher.
And I was, or I, yes, I was their first child.
Grew up on the ranch in South Texas, pretty idyllic in many ways, horses, cattle, the wide open spaces, freedom.
And then World War II came.
My father had missed World War I and I should add he graduated from A&M in the class of 1926, majored in animal husbandry, came back to the ranch and took over its operation upon graduation.
As I say in World War II he
while he had every reason not to go, volunteered in 1942, went into the Navy and we got to travel.
It was a real blessing for me because I was in junior high school
We got to live a while in Miami, in San Francisco, Princeton, New Jersey, and Pacific Grove, California.
So those were enriching experiences at a good time in my life.
Interestingly enough, coming from
rural school in South Texas, I never felt at a disadvantage in any of those school systems and did well.
One of the things I regretted was that at Aptos Junior High School in San Francisco, my best friend was Robert
Oh, grandfather had founded the Bank of America, Giannini.
And I wish I'd kept up the relationship there over the years.
But that was a very enriching experience.
And also, with Dad gone, I, at a young age, had some responsibilities on the farm and ranch that stood me in good stead in terms of management and so forth.
So I had an interesting and a rich life before coming to A&M.
You finished high school in what year?
1946.
Had you visited A&M before coming up?
Only once.
What was your impression?
Well, in 1939, Dad brought us to a football game.
It was quite an experience for a kid from South Texas.
He hadn't made any hotel reservations, so we ended up spending the night at a fleabag hotel in Navasota.
I remember how upset my mother was about that.
But the Corps of Cadets and all of it was very impressive for, as I say, a young kid from the country in South Texas.
As far as you were aware, before you came to enroll, what was A&M's quality, its strengths?
What kind of school was it as far as you knew then?
Well, of course, my blood had always been maroon, and interestingly enough, my dad
wanted me to try for Harvard or Yale or Princeton.
But I, as I say, my blood was too maroon.
And in my view, A&M was the preeminent institution in the state.
Aside from the liberal arts, of course, the University of Texas was looked at as being premier there.
But I intended to study agriculture and I wanted to go back to the ranch at the time.
Describe, when you came up to enroll, describe that trip.
Who came?
What did you bring?
Well, I came with two friends from a neighboring community that we went to church with, and one of their parents brought us, three of us came, and they just brought us and dumped us.
And I remember running into sophomores,
very first day, and that put the fear of God into us.
Now this was September of?
1946.
And what did you, physically, what did you bring with you?
Well, the contents of a footlocker, and that was about it.
I had an electric fan that my dad had used when he had spent a summer here.
and not much clothing other than underwear because we knew we were going to be buying clothes here or being issued clothes here.
But the first two sophomores we ran into were Pat Hall, you may remember, class of 49, and Jim Stegall.
And they were fearsome sophomores.
They put the fear of God into us.
How did you find out where you were assigned in terms of an outfit and your dormitory and so forth?
I don't really remember.
I guess, well, we knew when we came.
They'd told us ahead of time, so we knew where to come and where to go.
But the porters who brought us turned around and left as soon as we were unloaded, so we were completely on our own.
Where did you end up in what dorm?
Dorm 12, third floor, D Company Infantry.
Do you have any idea how it was, why it was infantry for you instead of something else?
Was it luck of the draw?
No, I guess I didn't specify.
That was probably it.
Although the Air Force ROTC unit was started in the, at midterm and I transferred there in January.
What kind of advice did you get from parents or friends or other family before you came?
I don't remember really getting any.
I just always assumed I was coming to A&M.
But they didn't say work hard or?
No, I think they assumed they'd done a good enough job raising me that they didn't have to worry about that.
What were the impressive physical features of the campus when you first got here?
Well, being a foot the size and having to go retrieve a footlocker from the Railway Express down at the train station and carry it back to the dorm in the steaming weather of September, then having to go get footlockers for upperclassmen.
Describe those first days as a fish.
Well, the first week we had only the sophomores with us and so they started off immediately putting a fear of God into us, threatening us with everything under the sun, scaring us out of our skins.
And what were some of the, were there any things they did in the privacy of darkness or?
Did they lecture you, stand you in the hall, or what?
All kinds of lecture and, excuse me, having to stand at attention and learning how to whip out and meet upperclassmen and learning the rules and learning campusology, all of that kind of thing.
And your outfit have a nickname?
D. Spiders.
Why do you know?
I don't know.
What did the upperclassmen say was special about D spiders?
There must have been some pride.
I think pride of being tough, being hard on the freshmen.
That's about all I remember.
And then you go to the dining hall, describe the room.
Excuse me.
Jimmy Woodall was a freshman with me.
We were in D Company together.
Where was his hometown?
Fort Worth.
Describe going into the dining hall and the routines there for a freshman.
Well, that was part of what we had to learn that first week.
Sit on the edge of our chairs, sit at attention, eat square meals, learn the names for the food, how to pass food to upperclassmen.
We'd have waited until all the upperclassmen were served, stuff like that.
Now were there some upperclassmen, well wait, this is just sophomores.
Were there any sophomores that you soon realized were special, either by their self-appointment or in fact were special in your outfit?
Well, some, yeah, it's just the variation of human nature.
One of the ones, I guess I wasn't considered a very good freshman, so I got to be the maid for a couple of sophomores, but one of whom was a Jew, Eric Gottlieb.
His family died in the Holocaust.
A lot of his family died in the Holocaust.
He was from Houston.
And he was a funny little guy.
He acted tough on the surface, but he wasn't at all tough like some of them were.
Now you said made, you mean that you were to go in and make up his?
Oh yes, clean up their rooms.
Yes, we freshmen had to.
clean up the rooms of our upperclassmen, make their beds, straighten the rooms, everything.
And how long did that duty last?
Oh, a year.
And so yours was to take care of that sophomore's room or were there other rooms too?
No, just one.
Just one.
And later did he indicate appreciation for your efforts?
No.
No, none of them did.
It was expected.
I should add that the two hometown buddies that came with me dropped out after six weeks.
Really?
And so that was, that was a real shock.
What, looking back on it, why did they drop out?
They just didn't want to take it.
Okay.
As freshmen.
Did they transfer somewhere else?
Yes.
I think one went to Southwest Texas and one went to A&I.
Did you ever think about dropping out?
No.
I knew I couldn't.
Dad, I couldn't face my dad.
As soon after you arrived, how long was it before you wrote a letter or called home to tell them what was going on?
Well, I couldn't call home because we didn't have a telephone until after, until about 1950, so there wasn't any way to call home.
And I'm not sure that I,
that I told my parents what was going on.
I don't think I told much now that when the hometown buddies went home, they told me.
Of course, they had to justify why they dropped out, so they made things sound terrible.
Did you begin to write letters regularly to your parents?
Oh, yes, yes.
About how often?
Oh, at least once a week.
And I probably still have them here somewhere.
My mother kept them, I think.
If someone were to read those letters now, would they get a very accurate account of fish life at A&M?
Probably not.
No.
What, you left out some things?
Although there's a very interesting,
Well, I'll say two things.
One, first time I went home was Thanksgiving, because there weren't any cars in those days, and we couldn't travel on the weekend.
We had to stay on campus.
Dad's mother had died the year before I was born, so I never knew her, but he had an aunt who was kind of a grandmother to me.
I got home Thanksgiving.
She took one look at me, and she said, Richard.
I had lost about 30 pounds and I was pretty haggard at Thanksgiving.
Now that loss of weight, that loss of weight came.
Who are you talking about?
Your picture.
Oh.
That loss of weight came from what?
Oh, just the stress.
You know, not being able to eat properly, and the stress at the table, the time in which you had to eat, and so forth, and the hazing.
The other thing I was going to say was that probably in about 1979, I was at a funeral in College Station Cemetery, and D.W.
Williams came over to me.
And he said, I've never told you this.
But he said, when you were a freshman, your father came to see me to talk about hazing.
And Dad had never said a word to me about it.
And D.W.
Williams had been a professor of Dad's.
And Dad had kept in touch with him over the years.
So he felt free to come and talk to him about the hazing situation that I know.
Now that's the kind of special item that I'm delighted to have in here.
And your dad never mentioned it to you?
Dad never said a word to me about it.
I never knew that he came.
And he never encouraged you to think about dropping out or anything like that?
Oh no, no, no.
And Dad had never really talked to me much about it, but I guess what he read in the paper and what these boys said went on.
Anyway, that's.
Your, who was your first fish old lady?
W.A.
Barber.
From?
Linden.
Describe him.
East Texas.
In your relationship.
Oh, he was, actually there were two.
Who was the other one?
Oh, Schuller, Bert Schuller.
Bert Schuller's from Houston, and the two were exactly opposite.
W.A.
was a country boy from Linden, talked with a slow drawl.
Very laid back.
Bert Schuller was an engineering major from Houston and very gregarious, open.
Both of them dropped out, by the way, before midterm of the fall semester.
Describe, when you all got moved in, describe your room.
What was, what was in it?
Where did people sleep?
Well, they had the bunk beds and there were two in the bunk, I mean two had bunk beds and then there was a single bed and there were three of us in the room.
And that didn't leave much room.
I've forgotten how many desks there were, but it was pretty crowded.
And who decided who got what bed?
How long was that done?
I don't remember how we decided that.
And it wasn't air conditioned.
It wasn't air conditioned, you're right.
All right, then the juniors and seniors come the second week.
How did things change when they arrived?
It just became more hectic, I guess.
We had more people, more people yelling at us.
Were there many veterans in the Corps then?
Not very many, and there was a separate non-reg.
I mean there was a separate veterans unit.
There may have been two, but they had their own units.
And there were some who were veterans, but not very many.
And the enrollment was quite large, wasn't it, for that era?
I don't know what it was that fall.
I do know that my senior year got up to 10,000, which was a peak.
And our graduating class, June of 50, was the largest on record to that time, 1,000.
When you were a fish, what did you and your buddies think about these World War II veterans?
I don't know.
It was just two different worlds.
Looking back in some of the classes, they were older and more mature, and I think that showed they tended to discuss things more than the younger students did.
Did you and any of your buddies start any kind of mischief early to retaliate against the— Oh, sure.
Give some examples.
Drownouts were a good one.
where we, as sophomores, one of the objectives was if somebody was, did something particularly bad to you, you wanted to get back on, and so you'd drown them out and take a garbage can and fill it with water and open the door and throw it in on them and then hope you didn't get caught.
Did you ever participate in drowning?
Oh, yes.
Did you ever get caught?
No, no.
For some that did get caught, what kind of punishment did they get?
Well, all of us got it when they couldn't catch the person that did it.
We all got it.
What?
What did they?
Oh, calisthenics, push-ups.
Mainly push-ups, having to do sit-ups in the hall and squat in the hall.
being yelled at and so forth.
How soon was a paddle used?
Oh, immediately.
And what was it?
I took swimming.
What kind of paddle was it?
Well, they were specially made.
No, but was it made out of a baseball bat?
No, no, no, no.
They were made out of one by, probably one by six.
They were, they weren't oars, but they were a lot like an oar.
just a straight piece of wood with a handle put on it.
And by the way, if you go over there in any of those cord arms today and you could get down between the walls, you'd find an awful lot of them in there.
Because after the bulls cracked down so much and if anybody got word that they were coming, you would,
jerk that medicine cabinet off the wall and drop your board down the
Down in the wall.
So.
No telling how many you could find over there.
It could not be retrieved.
No.
They were desperate to get rid of.
Describe early in your freshman fall, describe a typical class day from beginning to end.
What time did you get up and what did you all do when?
Well, we had to get up early and I don't remember the hours, but.
We had to get up early and get our rooms cleaned up before breakfast before we fell out and we'd fall out for formation and march to breakfast and then come back and we'd have to clean up our upperclassmen's rooms before we went to class and classes started at eight.
We used to have the old whistle up at the power plant and it
One thing that is vivid in my memory is how much it rained that fall.
I thought this was the wettest place on the earth.
And we had to, we had those old rubberized raincoats.
And so we would get hot rushing between class, hot and sweaty.
And then we'd chill in the class.
And I kept it cold till Thanksgiving.
But we had to run between classes.
And what I was going to say earlier about the paddle,
We, or I, finagled to take swimming.
You had the alternative.
You had to run the, what, the mile and seven tenths.
And everybody had to do that.
Or if you couldn't swim, you could take swimming.
Well, I finagled to swim.
And Art Adamson was the instructor.
You could tell when the upperclassmen had been on a tear because you could see the butts of the freshmen.
We swam into nude in those days, and old men.
It's very obvious what was going on.
If they really wanted to crack down, they'd gone to swimming.
The swimming pool that you all used was where?
Downs and Auditorium.
And it was covered?
Indoor.
Did it have heat?
I guess it did.
I'm sure it did because we swam year round.
Must have.
How big a class would there be?
Oh, golly.
I'd say probably 30.
Good-sized class.
And you're glad that you were able to do swimming instead of the regular PE.
Do you remember much about your first semester of classes?
What were some of the classes, or all of them if you can remember them?
Oh, golly.
Let me say that I had five professors that my dad had.
Mr. Bryson for chemistry, I had him for freshman chemistry.
A.L.
Darnell for dairy science.
Humphrey, no, golly, Hubert.
Humbert, Humbert, Humbert.
Mr. Humbert was a geneticist.
And he was one of these people who was very, very strict.
But anyway, Dad had him and I had him.
I believe Dr. Mayo.
In English?
In English.
Oh, describe him if you can, as a teacher.
Oh, excellent teacher.
I had a sophomore English from O.F.
Allen.
No, no, freshman English, second semester.
And he took a liking to me and recommended that I
that I skipped the regular sequence and went into literature under Dr. Morgan, S.H.
Morgan.
I'm trying to think who else it was that Dad had.
Anyway, there were five props.
Well, I had chemistry right after lunch, if you can believe it.
Who was that?
Mr. Bryson.
I mean, Brayton.
Brayton.
Brayton Fire School is the name for him.
And this shows you the kind of mischief that we were up to.
Had in the old chemistry lecture room.
And right after lunch, so you can imagine how hot it was.
And here we were, these freshmen that hadn't gotten much sleep the night before.
And so nearly everybody was dozing.
And we would take matches and give someone who was dozing a hot foot.
I'll tell you the things we did, climbing the water tower and the tunnels, all of that kind of stuff.
How long before you learned about the tunnels?
Oh, immediately.
I learned just immediately, yes.
Probably the first week.
Anyway, had English, well had swimming probably at 10 o'clock, and then had to get to English in the academic building at 11, so that was always a problem.
Forgotten what I had first period, but I remember chemistry.
English before lunch and chemistry right after lunch.
All right.
Then in the afternoon, when did drills and so forth, when did activities after class begin?
After 5.
In other words, classes went until 5.
But what if you didn't have anything you had to do in the afternoons if you didn't have a class?
No, but we had classes.
I mean, we took 18 hours, you see.
And I had chemistry lab, had biology lab.
Okay.
Military science, I think we had a lab with that.
We did marching.
So I don't remember any free time in the afternoons.
Okay.
Then back in evening meal was at 6?
Somewhere in there, yes.
Fall in and march to chow.
Then after supper, describe the routine on a weeknight.
Well, we had to be in our hole and had to be studying.
And that was strictly off-limits for the upperclassmen until 10, I think it was 10 o'clock.
We were to study and apply ourselves.
And how often did you all study till 10?
Oh, that was, that was enforced.
I mean, that was, that was strict.
The, that first semester you had mentioned some high school courses you had not had.
Did that affect your first year or so?
Well, of course chemistry was particularly hard.